#Stats 9/22/16

##Graphical Descriptive Statistics

* Pie charts
* Bar charts
* Histograms
* Time series plots
* Scatter diagrams


##Pie charts

A **pie chart** is a picture of a frequency distribution.

* The whole of the pie represents all of your data.
* Each pie slice represents the relative size (frequency) of the corresponding category.


##Bar charts

A **bar chart** is a set of graphical descriptive statistics involving rectangles. Its another visual description of a frequecy distribution.


##Histograms

A **histogram** is a member of the bar-chart family that is tuned for quantity data. They use rectangles over intervals -- height corresponds to frequency. There is no natural separation between rectangles of adjacent intervals.

Things to look for in a histogram:

* Where is the center?
* What is the spread like?
* What is the shape?
* Are there any outliers?


##Time series plots

**Time series plots** don't relate to frequency distributions. Data points in a time series plot are *ordered pairs*.

##A note on correlation vs causation

If two variables move together/apart, it doesn't *necessarily* mean there is a casual relationship.  
We cannot conclude a change in one factor causes the other variable to change.  
The two factors may simply be spuriously related (total coincidence).


##Scatter diagrams

A **scatter diagram** is used to see the relationship between *two* variables at once.  
Like in time series, dots indicate ordered pairs.  
Unlike time series, we do not connect the points with lines, because the data points don't have any particular order.

##Pro tips

1. Graphical descriptive statistics build off frequency distributions and are useful for all types and levesl of measure
2. Pie charts and histograms represent a frequency distribution or a relative frequency distribution.
3. There is an easy way to graph a cumulative frequency distributions: Plot the intervals on the horizontal axis and the cumulative frequencies on the vertical axis.
4. To visually compare two variables with no specific order, use the scatter plot. If there is a specific time ordering, use the time series plot.
5. All graphs should have a title.
6. Make sure all axes are carefully labeled, including units *and* scale.