#Stats 9/20/16

##Levels of data measure

Important attribute of data is its *level of measure*

Types of level of measure:

* Nominal
* 

###Nominal measure

Said to be nominal if there is no apparent ordering to the observations.

i.e.: Party affiliations (democrat, republican, independent)  
Little can be said about the relative importance of these responses.


###Ordinal measure

Said to have ordinal measure if there *is* an apparent ordering among the responses.

i.e.: Customer service survey, may be reported as  

* Excellent
* Good
* Fair
* Poor

Unlike nominal measure data, there is an obvious relationship among the responses.


###Cardinal measure

Said to have cardinal measure if:

* They have an apparent ordering and
* One can say **by how much** better one observed value is than another

THe question of by how much" can be answered if your data are of cardinal measure.

i.e.: Suppose your place of work has a union with three pay grades (A, B, and C):

| Pay Grade | A       | B       | C       |
| --------- | ---     | ---     | ---     |
| Amount    | $30,000 | $40,000 | $50,000 |


##Observing, cleaning, and categorizing data

We can create a sample by:

* **Observing** some number of *units of observation*
* Gather *data values, data points, responses,* or *observations*

Once you've gathered your raw data set...

| State | Tax Rate | DD Accidents | Year |
| ----- | -------- | ------------ | ---- |
| ME    | 0.07     | 3.4/day      | 2011 |
| CT    | 0.11     | 1.3/day      | 2011 |
| Maine | 7.5%     | 850/year     | '16  |
| Conn. | 10.3%    | 534/year     | 2016 |

This is ***unclean***. The data set is difficult to read because the data format is inconsistent. The data should be *normalized*

| State | Tax Rate | DD Accidents | Year |
| ----- | -------- | ------------ | ---- |
| ME    | 0.07     | 1241/year    | 2011 |
| CT    | 0.11     | 474.5/year   | 2011 |
| ME    | 0.075    | 850/year     | 2016 |
| CT    | 0.103    | 534/year     | 2016 |

This is the same data set after it has been normalized.

With a clean data set you can **categorize** the data  
All good categorizations are *mutually exclusive* and *collectively exhaustive*.  
A categorization is said to be *mutually exclusive* if each data point (observation) belongs to **only one** category.  
A categorization is said to be *collectively exhaustive** if each data point (observation) has an option in the collection.


##Tabular and graphical descriptive statistics

*Tabular* and *graphical* descriptive statistics can convey a lot of information

* Descriptive statistics summarize data to help understand them.
* In many real-world applications, time is important and valuable

###Tabular Descriptive Statistics

* Frequence Distributions
* Cumulative Frequency Distributions
* Relative Frequency

####Frequency Distributions

* Creating a *frequency distribution* entails breaking your data into mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive categories and
* Assigning a number -- a *frequency* -- to each category indicating the number of data points belonging to that category

Nominal and ordinal data is great with frequency distributions, the categories pratcically select themselves.  
But what about quantity data?

If the data is numbers, the categories may work better as intervals. Generally around 5 - 10 categories are best in a table.  


####Cumulative Frequency Distributions

A frequency distribution that reports *accumulated* frequencies instead of the regular frequencies.

A **cumulative frequency distribution* is a frequency distribution that reports *accumulated* frequencies instead of the regular frequencies


####Relative frequency

So far, everything has been **absolute frequency**.

**Relative frequencies** are proportions or percentages of the total number of categorical observations.

1. The raw data is often for your eyes only. Communicate the information quickly and concisely
2. The frequency distribution is useful for data of all levels of measure (unlike the average).
3. The sum of the frequencies should equal the total number of observations in your data set. If it does not, your categorization is either not mutually exclusive, not collectively exhaustive, or your data set is ... (chnaged slides too quickly)
4. It is standard practice to have all intervals be the same length. Occasionally the first and last intervals must depart from this convention.
5. When in doubt, default to relative frequncy -- most everyone is comfortable with proportions and percentages.

