#Stats 9/27/16

##Nominal/Quantitiy variables

###Measuring quantity variables

In order to learn about a population, obtain good *sample estimates* of the *population parameters*.

A **statistic** is an estimate of a population parameter. It is constructed using *only a sample* of data from the population.

Example: What is the average height of all students on campus?

1. Create an estimate of the average height of students
2. Collect height data from a subset of students (sample).
3. Calculate the average using the sample data.
	* This is the population parameter estimate

Alternatively, you could construct a population parameter. This is done by using *all* of the data from the population.


###Measuring nominal variables

When dealing with a nominal variable, we can only calculate a location measure.  
i.e.: eye color, region, political affiliation.

For example: republican can be considered a location. You either are, or you are not.

Any single attribute is made up of 'yes' and 'no'. Count the number of 'yes' and call it $X$. If our total sample size $n$ we can calculate a single location measure called the sample proportion.

The smaple proportion $\hat{\pi}$ for a data set with $X$ 'yes' is determined by the formula  
$\hat{\pi} = \frac{X}{n}$

The population proportion $\pi$ for a population with $X$ 'yes' is determined by the formula  
$\pi = \frac{X}{n}$  
where $n$ is population size

By making each 'yes' a 1 we can calculate $\hat{\pi}$ and $\pi$.


###Measures of location for quantity variables

When measuring quantity variables, we first determine where the data are centered. Thi is called *measures of central location*. It tells us where the data are located or 'centered'.

**Arithmetic mean**  
Given a simple data set like:  
$X = \{ 1, 3, 5 \}$  
the average is easy to find: just add the numbers up then divide by the number of data points.   
$\frac{1 + 3 + 5}{3}$

Abstract to the following data set:  
$X = \{ x_1, x_2, x_3 \}$  
where $x_i$ is the generic notation for each observation.

We know that an average is computed by adding up the numbers and dividing the number of observations

The same logic still applies in the abstract version:  
$\frac{x_1 + x_2 + x_3}{3}$

Can also be looked at as $\Sigma$ notation.  
$\frac{1}{3} \sum\limits_{i=1}^{3} x_i$

The *sample mean* $\bar{X}$ for data set $X = \{ x_1, x_2, ..., x_n\}$ is determined by the formula  
$\bar{X} = \frac{1}{n} \sum\limits_{i=1}^n x_i = \frac{\sum\limits_{i=1}^n x_i}{n}$  
where $n$ is the sample size.

Likewise, the *population mean* $\mu$ is the estimate of the true population.

**Median**  
The median of a data set is the value in the middle when the data items are arranged in ascending order.

Computing the median requires three steps:

1. Sort the data in ascending order.
2. Determine the location of the median in the sorted data.
	* If a sample: Use the formula $\frac{n+1}{2}$
	* If a population: Use $\frac{n+1}{2}$ 
3. Identify the median.

**Mode**  
The mode is the most frequently occuring observation in your data.
Take, for example, the data set  
$X = \{ 3, 3, 4, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4 \}$  
The mode is 2, because it occurs most often within the set.

The mode is the only one of these three that can give us location on nominal data.


##Location

###Weighted Mean

The *weighted average* is a *more general* version of the arithmetic mean.  
To understand what is meant by 'weighted', let's use the sample mean.

$\bar{X} = \frac{x_1 + x_2 + x_3}{n} = \frac{1}{n} x_1 + \frac{1}{n} x_2 + ... + \frac{1}{n} x_n$

This exposes how the standard arithmetic average workds. It takes each data value and multiplies by $\frac{1}{n}$. This is the 'weight' implied by the standard average. A weighted average allows this factor to vary.

Example: Jenny earned grades of $\{ A-, C+, B-, A- \}$ in her four courses last semester.

* What was her GPA for the semester?
* If all classes were an equl number of credits:
	* After converting these grades to their numerical equivalents:  
	$GPA = \frac{3.67 + 2.33 + 2.67 + 3.67}{4} = 3.085$
* However, if Jenny's classes varied in credit size
	* A weighted average would need to be found for the correct GPA.

To compute the weighted average for data set $X = \{ x_1, x_2, ..., x_n \}$ use the following formula:  
$\bar{X}_w = \sum\limits_{i=1}^n w_i x_i$  
where the weights must sum to one; that is,  
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n w_i = 1$

The standard average is a special case of the weighted average.

In our GPA example, forming the weights is fairly straightforward.  
$\{ A-, C+, B-, A- \} = \{ 3.67, 2.33, 2.67, 3.67 \}$  
With credit hours of $\{ 3, 4, 4, 2 \}$.  
First compute the total credit hours, here equal to 13, then form the weights as follows:  
$w_1 = \frac{3}{13}$, etc

Then multiply each weight by the corresponding GPA value:  
$\bar{X}_w = \frac{3}{13} 3.67 + \frac{4}{13} 2.33 + \frac{4}{13} 2.67 + \frac{2}{13} 3.67 = 2.95$