#Stats 10/13/16

##Discrete Probability

###Discrete Random Variables

A *random variable* is a numerical description of the outcome of an experiment.  
A random variable can be classified as being either *discrete* or *continuous* depending on the numerical values it assumes.

A *discrete* random variable may assume either a finite number of values or an infnite sequence of values

A *continuous* random variable may assume any numerical value in an interval or collection of intervals.

A probability distribution for a random variable describes how probabilities are distributed over the values of the random variable.


##The Binomial Distribution

The **binomial distribution** gives us the probabilities of a specific type of events using discrete probability.

An experiment is called a *binomail experiment* if it meets all five of the following conditions:

* Each of the *n* trials has two possible outcomes: success, and failure
* The probability of a success, denoted $\pi$ which stays the same across trials
* The trials are identical
* The trials are independent
* The random variable counts the number of successes in the *n* trials.

Our interest is in the number of successes occurring in the *n* trials.  
We let *k* denote the number of outcomes in each of the *n* trials.

Probability of a particular sequence of trial outcomes with *k* successes in *n* trials:  
$\pi^k(1 - \pi)^{n-k}$

So, flipping a coin 10,000 times and getting 60 heads would look like:  
$\frac{1}{2}^{60}(1 - \frac{1}{2})^{10000 - 60}$  

Number of experimental outcomes providing

${n \choose k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}$


###Example

What is the probability that all 12 shipments don't break if each shipment has a 97% chance that it won't break?

${12 \choose 12} \cdot 0.97^{12} \cdot (1 - 0.97)^{12 - 12}$  
$ = 0.97^{12}(1 - 0.97)^0$  
$ = 0.97^{12}$  
$ = 0.694$  
69.4% chance that all shipments don't break.