#Stats 9/29/16

##Measures of Scale

###Range

**Range** is the difference between the largest and smallest values in a data set.

Consider $X = \{1, 3, 5\}$.

The range here is the difference between the *max* and *min* values of the set.


###Variance and Standard Deviation

Variance can be found by taking the square of value - mean.

Standard Deviation is the square root of variance.


##Coefficient of Variation

Comparison of variabilities of two data sets.

How large the standard deviation i in relation to the mean  
Allows to compare variability across different data sets.

The *coefficient of variation* is defined as follows:  
$\frac{Standard Deviation}{Mean} \times 100%$


##Percentiles

Percentiles are families of numerical descriptive statistics

They include aspects of both location and dispersion measures.

Three percentiles seen already:

* Minimum
* Median
* Maximum

Computing percentiles uses similar steps to computing the median.

1. Sort $n$ observations in ascending order.
2. Determine the location of the $p^{th}$ percentile in the sorted data.
3. $round((p \times n + 50) / 100)$
4. Locate the percentile.

**Quartiles** are specific perentiles like the 25th and 75th.  
The first and third quartiles form the *inter-quartile range*.  

* The interquartile range tells you where the middle 50% of the data are, and as such, is a measure of dispersion relative to the median.


##Covariance and Correlation

**Covariance** is similar to variance.  
The primary purpose of covariance is to guage the sign of the mathematical relationship between two variables.

* **Positive covariance** indicates that the variables tend to move in the same direction (direct relationship)
* **Negative covariance** indicates that the variables tend to move in opposite directions (inverse relationship).

Covariance is calculated by multiplying the difference of value - mean by itself, you multiply value - mean by another data set's value - mean

###Correlation

While covariane determines the sign of the relationship between two variables, it cannot tell us anything about the "strength" of that relationship.

For example, if the covariance of height and weight is 86.64 the (positive) sign tells us that height and weight are directly related, but it does not tell us how strongly they are related.