#Stats 10/11/16

##Conditional Probability and Independence

**Conditional probability**: The probability of event *Y*, given event(s) *X* occur(s). This looks like $Pr(Y|X)$.

In some situations, the conditioning event doesn't matter. In this case, the event is *independent* of the conditioning event.

Two events are said to be *independent* if the probability of one event is in no way influenced by the probability or occurrence of the other.  
If events X and Y are independent then the $Pr(Y|X) = Pr(Y)$; that is, the conditional probability is equal to the unconditional probability.  
If $Pr(Y|X) \neq Pr(Y)$, then events $X$ and $Y$ are called *dependent events*.


###Probabilistic Multiplication

Probabilistic Multiplication provides a formal way to compute the probability of an intersection of two events.  
For events $A$ and $B$ the formula for computing the joint probability of $\{A \text{ and } B\}$ is $Pr(A \text{ and } B) = Pr(A) \times Pr(B|A)$ where $Pr(B|A)$ is the conditional probability of $B$ occuring given the occurrence of $A$.  
Note: if events $A$ and $B$ are independent the joint probability of $\{A \text{ and } B\}$ is:  
$Pr(A \text{ and } B) = Pr(A) \times Pr(B)$


###Counting

A **permutation** is a way to count the *arrangements* or *orderings* of objects.

How we count arrangements and orderings depends on whether objects that can be repeated. If objects can be repeated then we are counting *with replacement*.

A **combination** is a way to count *groups* or *committees* of objects. In a combination, the ordering of objects doesn't matter.  
For $n$ objects and $k$ blanks, the formula for combinations is:  
$_nC_k \equiv {{n}\choose{k}} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}$

