#Stats 11/8/16

##Random Sampling

The key to a proper sampling procedure is that every element in the population must have an *equal* chance of appearing in the sample.  
Over or under-representing one demographic characteristic or another, then our sample will not accurately represent the population.

Randomization is central to the administration of surveys, polling, and all manners of data collection  
Even with random sampling, two other issues can occur:

* Reporting errors
* Non-response bias


##Sampling Error

When done properly, sample information can be useful  
But just how good is 'good' sample information?  
This difference is *sampling error*.  
To measure sampling error, we need to understand the distribution of sample statistics


##Central Limit Theorem

As we cannot expect a given $\bar{X}$ to exactly equal $\mu$, we must ask:

* How large is the sample error?
* How close is the estimate ($\bar{X}$) to the parameter ($\mu$)?

In real-world statistical questions, $\bar{X}$ and $\mu$ are never *both* known.  
Our best alternative is to calculate the probability of a certain sampling error size.

A sampling distribution shows us how likely a value for a sample statistic is  

* the underlying distribution
* the size of the sample

A sampling distribution is **not** a distribution of the data in a population.  
It is a distribution over the possible values a sample statistic can take.

For a random sample of $n \geq 30$, the sampling distribution of $\bar{X}$ can be approximated by a normal probability distribution.  


If $n \geq 30$ values are independently drawn from the same population, then  
$\bar{X} \sim N(\mu, \sigma / \sqrt{n})$  
That is, the random variable $\bar{X}$ is approximately normal  
It will have $E(\bar{X}) = \mu$ and $V(\bar{X}) = \sigma^2 / n$  

The central limit theorem applies to other sample statistics as well when $n \geq 30$

The sample proportion $\hat{\pi} \equiv k / n$ obeys the central limit theorem:  
$\hat{\pi} \sim N(\pi, \sqrt{\pi(1 - \pi)/n}$  
It has an $E(\hat{\pi}) = \pi$ and $V(\hat{\pi}) = \pi (1 - \pi) / n$.

Suppose you select a random sample of $n = 10000$ voters choosing between two candidates.  
Suppose further you know the population proportion is $\pi = 0.5$.  
What is the probability your sample proportion is less than 0.49?  
In orther words, what is $Pr(\hat{\pi} < 0.49)$?  
The formula for the standard error is $\sqrt{\pi(1 - \pi)/n}$

###Production application

Packaging problem (check lecture 16 sheet)