#Stats 10/20/16

##Binomial Distribution

**Cumulative binomial properties** help us understand the probability of *compound* events.

For example, what's the probability of 2 or fewer successes in 7 trials, $Pr(X < 3)$?  
Add the probabilities of both $Pr(x = 0)$ and $Pr(x = 1)$


##Uniform Distribution

Both discrete and continuous probability distributions involve probabilities of mutual exclusion and collectively exhaustive events, the sum of which must be 1.  
Unlike a discrete variable a continuous random variable can assume any value in an interval on the real line or in a collection of intervals.

Discrete binomial events count the number of successes in $n$ trials, continuous events do not.  
Continuous events are measured over intervals.  
Consider the rate of return for a stock. We can't ask questions like "What is the probability of 10% return on this stock?"  
Instead, we ask questions like "What is the probability of earning a rate of return between 5% and 10% on this stock?"  

So to solve a continuous probability problem you must compute the probability of an interval of outcomes.

Suppose we want to understand the local annual snowfall (in inches) for this year.  
Because we can't yet know what it will be, snowfall this year is a random variable, and because snowfall can be any real number it is a continuous random variable.   
In the past snowfall has always been between 12 and 52 inches. The past snowfall is equally distributed over this range.  
This is an example of a **continuous uniform distribution**. Snowfall is uniformly distributed over the interval [12,52]. 
What will a distribution with these properties look like?
 
Other examples of continuous uniform random variables:
 
 * A spinner's location
 * Throwing a dart at a dart board
 * Bus wait time
 * Position of an air molecule in the room
 * Where the baseball strikes the bat
 * Oil exploration: the point of oil-water contact

Uniform probability density function  
$f(x) = \frac{1}{b-a}$  for $X \in [a,b]$ and $f(x) = 0$ for all other $X$ values where $a$ is the smallest value the variable can assume and $b$ is the largest value the variable can assume.
 
Expected value of $X$: $E(X) = \frac{a+b}{2}$

Variance of X: $V(X) = \frac{(b-a)^2}{12}$


##Normal Distribution

The *normal distribution* is also called the *normal curve* or *bell curve*. Almost surely the most important probability distribution in all of Statistics.

Examples of random variables that are nomrally distributed:

* Agricultural yeilds
* Housing prices in a city
* Standardized test scores

Like the uniform distribution the normal distribution is continuous, having an infinite number of possible outcomes.  
The probabilities of all these outcomes must sum to one.

Characteristics of the normal distribution:

* The normal distribution is a symmetric distribution.
* Two parameters, $\mu$ (mean) and $\psi$(standard deviation determine the location and shape of the distribution.
* The highest point on the normal curve is at the mean, which is also the median and mode.